Hey, everyone. It's so awesome to be here with you all.
Thanks for taking the time out of your day to be part of
Talk Python for this year in review,
this Python year in review.
Yeah, let's just jump right into it. Gregory.
Hi. Welcome to the show. Welcome back to the show.
Yeah. On a positive note,
the last time I recorded,
I had to record in my home in my closet,
because the power was out throughout my city.
Today, I'm actually back in my recording studio and glad to be
to chat with people. I'm an associate professor of computer and information science, and I do
research in software engineering and software testing. I've built a bunch of Python tools,
and one of the areas we're studying now is flaky test cases in Python projects.
I'm also really excited about teaching in a wide variety of areas. In fact, I use Python for
operating systems classes or theory of computation classes. And one of the things I'm excited about
is being a podcast host.
I'm also a host on the Software Engineering Radio podcast
sponsored by the IEEE Computer Society.
And I've had the cool opportunity
to interview a whole bunch of people
in the Python community.
So Michael, thanks for welcoming me to the show.
Yeah, it's awesome to have you back.
And we talked about FlakyTest last time.
I do have to say your AV setup is quite good.
I love the new mic and all that.
Thomas, welcome.
Awesome to have you.
Thanks for having me. I'm Tomas Wauters. I'm a longtime Python core developer, although not as long as one of the other guests on this podcast.
I worked at Google for 17 years. For the last year or so, I've worked at Meta. In both cases, I work on Python itself within the company and just deploying it internally.
I've also been a board member of the PSF, although I'm not one right now.
And I've been a steering council member for five years and currently not because of the
elections are going and I don't know what the result is going to be.
But I think there's like five, six chance that I'll be on the steering council since
we only have six candidates for five positions when this episode probably airs.
I don't know.
Yeah.
Amazing.
that that's quite the contribution to the whole community thank you oh i i i always forget this
i also got the uh what is it the distinguished service award from the psf this year i should
probably mention that so yes i've been i have been recognized no need to talk about it further
wonderful wonderful jody welcome back on the show awesome to catch up with you
yeah thanks for having me back um so i am a data scientist and developer advocate
at JetBrains working on PyCharm.
And I've been a data scientist for around 10 years.
And prior to that, I was actually a clinical psychologist.
So that was my training, my PhD,
but abandoned academia for greener pastures.
Let's put it that way.
Noah Franz Gregory.
Brett, hello.
Good to see you.
Hello.
Yes.
Okay, let's see here.
I've been at Microsoft for 10 years.
Started working on AI R&D for Python developers.
Also keep Wazzy running for Python here
and do a lot of internal consulting for teams.
Outside, I am actually the shortest running
core developer on this call, amazingly,
even though I've been doing it for 22 years.
I've also only gotten the Frank Wilson Award,
not the DSA.
So I feel very underaccomplished here as a core developer.
Yeah, that's me in a nutshell.
I'm still trying to catch Anthony Shaw.
Most quoted.
Yeah, most quoted.
I will say actually at work, it is in my email footer
that I'm a famous Python quotationist.
That was Anthony Shaw's suggestion, by the way.
That was not mine.
But it does link to the April Fool's joke from last year.
And I am still trying to catch Anthony Shaw, I think,
on appearances on this podcast.
Well, plus one.
Anthony Shaw shouldn't be here, honestly.
I mean, I put it out into Discord.
he could have been here, but probably at an odd time.
You used to work on VS Code a bunch,
on the Python aspect of VS Code.
You recently changed roles, right?
Not recently.
That was, I used to be the dev manager.
By the 70 years, years ago?
Yeah, September of 2024.
So it's been over a year.
That counts as recent for me.
Yes, I used to be the dev manager for the Python experience in VS Code.
Okay.
Very cool.
That's quite a shift.
Yeah, it went back to being an IC, basically.
You're good at your TPS reports again now?
Actually, I just did do my connect, so I kind of did.
Awesome.
Reuben, I bet you haven't filed a TPS report in at least a year.
At least, at least.
So yeah, I'm Reuben.
I'm a freelance Python and Pandas trainer.
I just celebrated this past week 30 years since going freelance.
So I guess it's working out okay.
We'll know at some point if I need to get a real job.
So I teach Python Pandas both at companies and on my online platform.
I have newsletters.
I've written books, speak at conferences, and generally try to help people improve their
Python and Pandas fluency and confidence and have a lot of fun with this community
as well as with the language.
Yeah, awesome.
Oh, good to have you here.
Barry, it's great to have a musician on the show.
Thanks.
Yeah, I've got my basses over here.
So, you know, if you need to be serenaded.
Yeah, like a Xenopython may break out at any moment.
Good, good, good.
Well, thanks for having me here.
Yeah, I've been a core developer for a long time, since 1994.
And I've been, you know, in the early days, I did tons of stuff for Python.org, worked with Guido at CNRI.
And, you know, we moved everything from the mailing, you know, the Postmaster stuff and version control systems back in the day, websites, all that kind of stuff.
I try to not do any of those things anymore.
There's more, way more competent people doing that stuff now.
I have been a release manager
I'm currently back
on the steering council
and running again
so between Thomas and I
we'll see who makes it to
six years I guess
and I'm currently working for
NVIDIA and I do
all Python stuff
some
half and half roughly of
things and external open source community work, both in packaging and in core Python.
So that's, I guess, quick.
Yeah, awesome.
I think that's about it.
Yeah, you all are living in exciting tech spaces.
That's for sure.
For sure.
Yeah.
Well, great to have you all back on the show.
Let's start with our first topic.
So the idea is we've each picked at least a thing that we think stood out in 2025 in the Python space that we can focus on.
And, yeah, well, let's go with Jodi first.
I'm excited to hear what you thought was one of the bigger things.
Yeah.
So I'm going to mention AI.
Like, wow, what a, you know, big surprise.
So to kind of give context of where I'm coming from, I've been working in NLP for a long time.
I like to say I was working on LLMs before they were cool.
So sort of playing around with the very first releases from Google in like 2019, incorporating that into search.
So I've been very interested sort of seeing the unfolding of the GPT models as they've grown.
And let's say I'm slightly disgusted by the discourse around the models as they become more mainstream, more sort of the talk about people's jobs being replaced, a lot of the hysteria, a lot of the doomsday stuff.
So I've been doing talks and other content for around two and a half years now, just trying to cut through the hype a bit, being like, you know, they're just language models, they're good for language tasks.
Let's think about realistically what they're about.
And what was very interesting for me this year, I've been incorrectly predicting the bubble
bursting for about two and a half years.
So I was quite vindicated when in August GPT-5 came out and all of a sudden everyone else
started saying, maybe this is a bubble.
Yeah.
So you think that was the first big release that was kind of a letdown compared to what
the hype was?
Yeah.
And it was really interesting.
So I found this really nice Atlantic article and I didn't save it, unfortunately.
but essentially it told sort of the whole story of what was going on behind the scenes. So GPT-4
came out in March of 2023. And that was the model that came out with this Microsoft research paper
saying, you know, sparks of AGI, artificial general intelligence, blah, blah, blah. And from that
point, there was really this big expectation sort of fueled by open AI that GPT-5 was going to be
AGI model. And it turns out what was happening internally is these scaling laws that were sort of
considered, you know, this exponential growth thing that would sort of push the power of these models
perhaps towards human-like performance. They weren't laws at all. And of course, they started failing.
So the model that they'd originally pitched as GPT-4 just didn't live up to performance. They
started this post-training stuff where they were going more into like specialized reasoning models.
And what we have now are good models that are good for specific tasks.
But I don't know what happened, but eventually they had to put the GPT-5 label on something.
And yeah, let's say it didn't live up to expectations.
So I think the cracks are starting to show because the underlying expectation always was this will be improving to the point where anything's possible.
and you can't put a price on that.
But it turns out that if maybe there's a limit on what's possible,
yeah, you can put a price on it.
And a lot of the valuations are on the first part.
Yes, and it's always been a bit interesting to me
because I come from a scientific background
and you need to know how to measure stuff, right?
And I'm like, what are you trying to achieve?
Like Gregory's nodding, like please jump in.
I'm on my monologue, so please don't interrupt me.
you really need to understand what you're actually trying to get these models to do. What is AGI?
No one knows this. And what's going to be possible with this? And it's more science fiction than fact.
So this for me has been the big news this year. And I'm feeling slightly smug,
I'm going to be honest, even though my predictions were off by about a year and a half.
Yeah, maybe it's not an exponential curve. It's a titration S curve with an asymptote.
Yeah, sigmoid.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
I mean, I think we have to sort of separate the technology from the business.
And the technology, even if it doesn't get any better, even if we stay with what we have today, I still think this is like one of the most amazing technologies I've ever seen.
It's not a god.
It's not a panacea.
But it's like a chainsaw that if you know how to use it, it's really effective.
But in the hands of amateurs, you can really get hurt.
And so, yes, it's great to see this sort of thing happening and improving, but who knows
where it's going to go.
And I'm a little skeptical of the AGI thing.
What I'm a little more worried about is that these companies seem to have no possible way
of ever making the money that they're promising to their investors.
And I do worry a lot that we're sort of like a year 2000 situation where, yeah, the technology
But the businesses are unsustainable. And out of the ashes of what will happen, we will get some amazing technology and even better than we had before. But there are going to be ashes.
Yeah. For me, that also makes me worry. And I don't know if anyone reads Ed Zitron here. He's a journalist kind of digging into the state of the AI industry. He does get a bit sort of, he has a bit of a reputation as a bit of a crank now. So I think he's leaned into that pretty hard. But he does take the time to also pull out numbers and point out things that don't make sense.
And he was one of the first ones to sound the whistle
on this circular funding we've been seeing.
So the worry, of course, is when a lot of this becomes borrowings
from banks and then that starts dragging in funding
from everyday people and also the effect that this has had
on particularly the US economy, like the stock market.
I think the investment in AI spending now exceeds consumer spending
in the US, which is a really scary prospect.
That is crazy.
But yeah, also as Reven said, like I love LLMs.
They are the most powerful tools we've ever had
for natural language processing.
It's phenomenal the problems we can solve with them now.
Like I didn't think this sort of stuff would be possible
when I started in data science.
I still think there's a use case for agents,
although I do think they've been a bit overstated,
especially now that I'm building them.
Let's say it's not very fun building non-deterministic software.
It's quite frustrating, actually.
But I hope we're going to see improvements in the framework,
particularly I've heard good things about Pydantic AI.
And yeah, hopefully we can control the input outputs
and make them a bit more strict.
This will fix a lot of the problems.
One thing I do want to put out in this conversation,
I think is worth separating.
And Reuben, you touched on this some,
but I want to suggest to you all,
throw this out to you all and see what you think.
I think it's very possible that this AI bubble
crashes the economy and causes bad things
economically to happen and a bunch of companies
that are like wrappers over OpenAI, API, go away.
But I don't think things like the agentic coding tools
will vanish.
They might stop training. They might slow their
advance because that's super expensive.
Even as you said,
even if we just had
Claude Sonnet 4
and the world
never got something else, it would be so much
farther beyond autocomplete
and the other stuff that we had before and
Stack Overflow that it's
I don't think it's going to go. The reason I'm throwing this out there
is I was talking to somebody and they were like, well, I don't think
it's worth learning because I think the bubble is going to
pop and so I don't want to learn this agent at coding because it won't be around very long.
What do you all think?
Yeah, I think it's here to stay. I think it's just
where is the limit? Where does it stop potentially? I think that's the
big open question for everybody, right? Pragmatically, it's a tool.
It's useful in some scenarios and not in others. And you
just have to learn how to use the tool appropriately for your use case and to get what you need out of it.
And sometimes that's not using it because it's just going to take up more time than it will to be productive.
But other times it's fully juices up your productivity and you can get more done.
It's give and take.
But I don't think it's going to go anywhere because as you said, Michael, there's even academics doing research now.
There's open weight models as well.
There's a lot of different ways to run this, whether you're at the scale of the frontier models that are doing these huge trainings or you're doing something local and more specialized.
So I think the general use of AI isn't going anywhere.
I think it's just a question of how far can this current trend go and where will it, I don't want to say stop, because that plays into the whole, it's going to completely go away.
I don't think it ever will.
I think it's just going to be where are we going to start to potentially bump up against limits.
One thing that I'll say is that many of these systems are almost, to me, like a dream come true.
Now, admittedly, it's the case that the systems I'm building are maybe only tens of thousands of lines or hundreds of thousands of lines.
But I can remember thinking to myself, how cool would it be if I had a system that could automatically refactor and then add test cases and increase the code coverage and make sure all my checkers and linters pass and do that automatically and continue the process until it achieved its goal?
And I remember thinking that five to seven years ago, I would never realize that goal in my entire lifetime. And now when I use like anthropics models through open code or cloud code, it's incredible how much you can achieve so quickly, even for systems that are of medium to moderate scale.
So from my vantage point, it is a really exciting tool. It's incredibly powerful. And what I have found is that the LLMs are much better when I teach them how to use tools. And the tools that it's using are actually really quick, fast ones that can give rapid feedback to the LLM and tell it whether it's moving in the right direction or not.
Yeah, there's an engineering angle to this. It's not just Vibe Coding if you take the time to learn it.
There was actually a very interesting study. I don't think the study itself has been released. I haven't found it yet, but I saw a talk on it by some guys at Stanford. So they call it the 10K developer study. And basically what they were doing was studying real code bases, including I think 80% of them were actually private code bases, and seeing the point where the team started adopting AI.
And so their findings are really interesting and nuanced.
And I think they probably intuitively align with what a lot of us have experienced with AI.
So basically, yes, there are productivity boosts, but it produces a lot of code, but the code tends to be worse than the code you would write and also introduces more bugs.
So when you account for the time that you spend refactoring and debugging, you're still more productive.
But then it also depends on the type of project, as Gregory was saying.
So it's better for greenfield projects.
It's better for smaller code bases.
It's better for simpler problems.
And it's better for more popular languages because, obviously, there's more training data.
And so this was actually I like this study so much.
I'll actually share it with you, Michael, if you want to put it in the show notes.
But it shows that, yeah, the picture is not that simple.
And all this conflicting information and conflicting experiences people were having line up completely with this.
So again, like I work at an IDE company, it's tools for the job.
It's not like your IDE will replace you.
AI is not going to replace you.
It's just going to make you maybe more productive sometimes.
Yeah.
Wait, IDE, you work for me.
I mean, the other thing is a lot of people and a lot of the sort of when people talk about
AI and LLMs and so forth in context of coding, it's the LLM writing code for us. And maybe because
I'm not doing a lot of serious coding, it's more instruction, so forth. I use it as like a sparring
or brainstorming partner. So it does checking of my newsletters for language and for tech edits
and just sort of exploring ideas. And for that, maybe it's because I do everything in the last
minute and I don't have other people around or I'm lazy or cheap and don't want to pay them.
But definitely the quality of my work has improved dramatically. The quality of my understanding has
improved, even if it never wrote a line of code for me. Just getting that feedback on a regular
automatic basis is really helpful. Yeah, I totally agree with you. All right. We don't want to spend
too much time on this topic, even though I believe Jody has put her finger on what might be the
biggest tidal wave of 2025, but still a quick parting thoughts.
Anyone else?
I'm glad I'll never have the right bash from scratch ever again.
Tell me about it. Yeah.
I'll just, I'll just say from, from anecdotally,
the thing that I love about it is when I need to do something and I need to go
through docs, online docs for whatever it is, you know,
It might be GitLab or some library that I want to use or something like that.
I never even search for the docs.
I never even try to read the docs anymore.
I just say, hey, you know, whatever model I need to set up this website,
and just tell me what to do or just do it.
And it's an immense time saver and productivity.
And then it gets me bootstrapped to the place where now I can start to be creative.
I don't have to worry about just like digging through pages and pages and pages of docs to figure out one little setting here or there.
That's an amazing time saver.
Yeah, that's a really good point.
Another thing that I have noticed, there might be many things for which I had a really good mental model, but my brain can only store so much information.
So, for example, I know lots about the abstract syntax tree for Python, but I forget that sometimes.
And so it's really nice for me to be able to bring that back into my mind quickly with an LLM.
And if it's generating code for me that's doing a type of AST parsing, I can tell whether that's good code or not because I can refresh that mental model.
So in those situations, it's not only the docs, but it's something that I used to know really well that I have forgotten some of.
And the LLM often is very powerful when it comes to refreshing my memory and helping me to get started and move more quickly.
All right. Out of time, I think. Let's move on to Brett. What do you got, Brett?
Well, I actually originally said we should talk about AI, but Jody had a way better pitch for it than I did because my internal pitch was literally AI. Do I actually have to write a paragraph explaining why? Then Jody actually did write the paragraph, so she did a much better job than I did.
So the other topic I had was using tools to run your Python code.
And what I mean by that is traditionally, if you think about it,
you install the Python interpreter, right?
Hopefully you create a virtual environment, install your dependencies,
and you call the Python interpreter in your virtual environment to run your code.
And those are all the steps you went through to run stuff.
But now we've got tools that will compress all that into a run command
and just do it all for you.
And it seems like the community has shown a level of comfort with that, that I'd say snuck up on me a little bit.
But I would say that I think it's a good thing, right?
It's showing us, I'm going to say us, as the junior core developer here on this call.
As to, sorry to make you too feel old, but admittedly, Barry did write my letter of recommendation to my master's program.
So Barry already knows this.
Anyway, because I think what happened was like, yeah, we had Hatch and BDM and Poetry before that and uv as of last year all kind of come through and all kind of build on each other and take ideas from each other and kind of just slowly build up this kind of repertoire of tool approaches that they all kind of have a baseline kind of, not synergy is the right word,
but share just kind of approach to certain things
with their own twists and added takes on things.
But in general, this whole like, you know what?
You can just tell us to run this code
and we will just run it, right?
Like in-line script metadata coming in
and help making that more of a thing.
I just claim where I was the  PEP delegate
for getting that in.
But I just think that's been a really awesome trend
and I'm hoping we can kind of leverage that a bit.
I have personal plans that we don't need to go into here.
I'm hoping as a Python core team,
we can help boost this stuff up a bit
and help keep a good baseline for this for everyone.
I think it's shown that Python is still really good for beginners.
You just have to give them the tools to hide some of the details
to not shoot yourself in the foot.
It's a great outcome.
2025 might be the year that the Python tools stepped outside of Python.
Instead of being you install Python and then use the tools,
You do the tool to get Python, right?
Like uv and PDM and others.
Yeah, and inverted the dependency graph
in terms of just how you put yourself in, right?
I think the interesting thing is these tools treat Python
as an implementation detail almost, right?
When you just say uv or hatch run or PDM run thing,
these tools don't make you have to think about the interpreter.
It's just a thing that they pull in to make your code run, right?
It's not even necessarily something you have to care about
if you choose not to.
And it's an interesting shift in that perspective, at least for me.
But I've also been doing this for a long time.
Yeah, I think you're really on to something.
And what I love at sort of a high level is this,
I think there's a renewed focus on the user experience.
And like uv plus the PEP 723, the inline metadata,
you can put uv in the shebang line of your script.
And now you don't have to think about anything.
You know, you get uv from somewhere
and then it takes care of everything.
And Hatch can work the same way for,
I think for developers,
but like this renewed focus on getting,
like installing your Python executable.
Like you don't really have to think about,
because those things are very complicated
and people just want to kind of hit the ground running.
And so if you think about the previous discussion
about AI, right? Like, like I just want things to work. I have, I know what I want to do.
I can see it. I can see the vision of it. And I just don't want to. And an analogy is like when
I first learned Python and I came from C++ and all those languages. And I thought, oh my gosh,
just to get like, hello world, I have to do a million little things that I shouldn't have to do,
Like create a main and get my braces right and get all my variables right and get my pound includes correct.
And now I don't have to think about any of that stuff.
And the thing that was eye-opening for me with Python was the distance between vision of what I wanted and working code just really narrowed.
And I think that as we are starting to think about tools and environments and how to bootstrap all this stuff,
We're also now taking all that stuff away because people honestly don't care.
I don't care about any of that stuff.
I just want to go from like, oh, I woke up this morning and had a cool idea
and I just wanted to get it working.
Or you wanted to share it so you could just share the script
and you don't have to say, here's your steps that you get started with.
Exactly, exactly.
I want to thank the two of you for – I'm sorry, go ahead.
I'm just going to say, like, for years teaching Python that how do we get it installed?
At first, it surprised me how difficult it was for people.
Because like, oh, come on, we just got Python.
Like, what's so hard about this?
But it turns out it's a really big barrier to entry for newcomers.
And I'm very happy that Jupyter Lite now has solved its problems with input.
And it's like huge.
But until now, I hadn't really thought about starting with uv because it's cross-platform.
And if I say to people in the first 10 minutes of class, install uv for your platform, and then say uv in it, your project, bam, you're done.
It just works.
And then it works cross-platform.
This is mind-blowing, and I'm going to try this at some point.
Thank you.
I can comment on the mind-blowing part because now when I teach undergraduate students, we start with uv in the very first class, and it is awesome.
There were things that would take students, even very strong students who've had lots of experience, it would still take them a week to set everything up on their new laptop and get everything ready and to understand all the key concepts and know where something is in their path.
that now we just say install uv for your operating system
and get running on your computer
and then, hey, you're ready to go.
And I don't have to teach them about Docker containers
and I don't have to tell them how to install Python
with some packet manager.
All of those things just work.
And I think from a learning perspective,
whether you're in a class or whether you're in a company
or whether you're teaching yourself,
UV is absolutely awesome.
I'm actually wondering whether I am the one who is newest to Python here.
I taught myself Python in 2011.
So I was like Python 2.7 stage.
But it was my first programming language.
I was just procrastinating during my PhD and I was like, I should learn to program.
So I just taught myself Python.
And I can tell you, you do not come from an engineering background.
And you're like, what is Python?
What is Python doing?
Why am I typing Python to execute this hello world?
And if you're kind of curious, you get down a rabbit hole before you even get to the point where you're just focusing on learning the basics.
And so it's exactly, I was going to say with Reuven, like whether you thought about it for teaching, because we're now debating for humble data, which is a beginner's data science community that I'm part of, whether we switch to uv.
this was Chuck's idea because it does abstract away all these details. The debate I have is,
is it too magic? This is kind of the problem because I also remember learning about things
like virtual environments because again, this was my first programming language and being like,
oh, it's a very good idea. This is best practices. And it's also a debate we have in PyCharm, right?
Like how much do you magic away the fundamentals versus making people think a little bit, but
I'm not sure.
Would you even let somebody run without a virtual environment?
That's a stance you could take.
I used to when I first learned Python because it was too complicated.
But then I learned better.
But yes.
I think the consideration here is like hiding the magic isn't like hiding the details and having all this magic just work is great as long as it works.
And the question is, how is it going to break down and how are people going to know how to deal when it breaks down if you hide all the magic?
And I think virtual ends were, or let's say before we had virtual ends, installing packages was very much in the, you had to know all the details because it was very likely going to break down in some way right before we had virtual ends.
Because you would end up with weird conflicts or multiple copies of a package installed in different parts of the system.
when we got virtual ends, we, we sort of didn't have to worry about that anymore
because we were trained in that you can just blow away the virtual one and it just works.
And with uv, we're back into, this looks like a single installation.
We don't know what's going to go on, but we've learned we as a community and also the people
working on, on uv, we have learned from those earlier mistakes or not, maybe not mistakes,
but consequences of the design and they have created something that is that appears to be
very stable where it's unlikely the magic will break and when the magic does break it's obvious
what the problem is or or it automatically fixes itself so like it's not reusing uh broken uh
installations and that kind of thing so the risk now as it turns out i think as is proven by the
community adopting uv so fast and so willingly, I think it's acceptable. I think it's, yeah,
I think it's proven itself. It's clear that this is, it's worth the potential of discovering
weird edge cases later, both because it's probably low likelihood, but also the people behind uv,
Astral, have proven that they would jump in and fix those issues, right? They would do anything
they need to keep uv workable the same way.
And they have a focus that Python as a whole cannot have
because they cater to fewer use cases
than Python as a whole needs to.
Yeah.
And on the audience, Galano says,
as an enterprise tech director and Python coder,
I believe we should hide the magic
which empowers the regular employee to do simple things
that make their job easier.
Yeah.
I'll go ahead, Barry.
No, I think this notion of abstractions, right, has always been there in computer science.
And, you know, we've used tools or languages or systems where we've tried to bring that abstraction layer up so that we don't have to think about all these details, as I mentioned before.
The question is, that's always the happy path.
And when I'm trying to teach somebody something like, here's how to use this library or here's how to use this tool, I try to be very opinionated to keep people on that happy path.
Like, assume everything's going to work just right.
Here's how you just make you go down that path to get the thing done that you want.
The question really is, when things go wrong, how narrow is that abstraction?
And are you able, and even when you're just curious,
like what's really going on underneath the hood?
Of course, that's not a really good analogy today
because cars are basically computers on wheels
that you can't really understand how they work.
But back in your day.
But back in my day, we were changing spark plugs, you know.
And crank that window down.
Exactly.
So I think we always have to leave that room
for the curious and the bad path
where when things go wrong
or when you're just like,
you know what, I understand how this works,
but I'm kind of curious about what's really going on.
How easy is it for me to dive in
and get a little bit more of that background,
you know, a little bit more of that understanding
of what's going on.
Yeah, I want the magic to decompose, right?
Like you should be able to explain the magic path
via more decomposed steps using the tool
all the way down to what the tools actually do
behind the scenes.
Just to admit, the reason I brought this up
and I've been thinking about this a lot
is I'm thinking of trying to get the Python launcher
to do a bit more.
Because one interesting thing we haven't really brought up here
is we're all seeing uv, uv, uv.
UV is a company.
There's always the risk they might disappear.
And we haven't de-risked ourselves from that.
Now, we do have Hatch.
We do have PDM.
But as I said, there's kind of a baseline I think they all share
that I think they would probably be okay if the Python launcher just did
because that's based on standards, right?
Because that's the other thing that there's been a lot of work
that has led to this step, right?
Like we've gotten way more packaging standards.
We've got PEP 723 like we mentioned.
There's a lot of work that's come up to lead to this point
that all these tools can lean on to have them all have an equivalent outcome
because it's expected as how they should be.
And so I think it's something we need to consider
of how do we make sure,
like, by the way,
I know the people,
they're great.
I'm not trying to spare them
or think they're going to go away,
but it is something
we have to consider.
And I will also say, Jody,
I do think about this for teaching
because I'm a dad now
and I don't want my kid coming home
when they get old enough
to learn Python and go,
hey, dad,
why is getting Python code
running so hard?
So I want to make sure
that that never happens.
So it is for me.
From the start.
Yeah. I realized something for the 2026 year interview, I have to bring a sign that says time for next topic because we got a bunch of topics and we're running low on time. So Thomas, let's jump over to yours.
Oh, and I have two topics as well. So I'm only going to have to pick my favorite child, right? That's terrible.
Yeah. So my second favorite child is Lazy Imports, which is a relatively new development. So we'll probably not get to that.
And just accepted.
And yes, it's been accepted and it's going to be awesome.
So I'll just give that a shout out and then move to my favorite child, which is free-threaded Python.
For those who were not aware, the global interpreter lock is going away.
I am stating it as a fact.
It's not actually a fact yet, but that's because the steering council hasn't realized the fact yet.
It is trending towards.
Yeah.
Well, so I was originally on the steering council that accepted the proposal to add free threading as a, as an experimental feature.
We had this idea of adding it as experimental and then making it supported, but not the default and then making it the default.
And it was all a little vague and, and up in the air.
And then I didn't get reelected for the steering council last year, which I was not sad about at all.
I sort of ran on a, well, if there's nobody better, I'll do it.
but otherwise I have other things to do.
And it turns out those other things were making sure that pre for that Python
landed in a supported state.
So I lobbied the steering council quite hard as Barry might remember at the
start of the year to, to get some movement on this,
like get some decision going.
So for Python 3.14, it is officially supported.
The performance is great.
It's like between a couple of percent slower and 10% slower,
depending on the hardware and the compiler that you use.
It's basically the same speed on macOS, which is really like it's that's a combination of the ARM hardware and Clang specializing things.
But it's basically the same speed.
Wow.
And then on recent GCCs on Linux, it's like a couple of percent slower.
So the main problem is really community adoption, getting third-party packages to update their extension modules for the new APIs and the things that by necessity sort of broke, and also supporting free threading in a good way in packages.
For Python code, it turns out there's very few changes that need to be made for things to work well under free threading.
They might not be entirely thread safe, but usually, like almost always in cases where it wasn't thread safe before either, because the GIL doesn't actually affect thread safety, just the likelihood of things breaking.
I do think there's been a bit of a, the mindset of the Python community hasn't really been focused on creating thread safe code because the GIL is supposed to protect us.
But soon as it takes multiple steps, then all of a sudden it's just less likely.
It's not that it couldn't happen.
Yeah, that's my point, right?
It's not, the GIL never gave you threat safety.
The GIL gave CPython's internals threat safety.
It never really affected Python code, and it very rarely affected threat safety in extension modules as well.
So they already had to take care of making sure that the global interpreter law couldn't be released by something that they ended up calling indirectly.
So it's actually not that hard to port most things to support free threading.
And the benefits, we've seen some experimental work because, you know, it's still new.
There's still a lot of things that don't quite support it.
There's still places where thread contention slows things down a lot.
But we've seen a lot of examples of really promising, very parallel problems that now speed up by 10x or more.
And it's going to be really excited in the future.
And it's in 2025 that this all started.
I mean, Sam started it earlier.
But, you know, he's been working on this for years, but it landed in 2025.
It dropped its experimental stage in 314, basically.
Yes.
I totally agree.
Go ahead.
I was going to say, were we all, the three of us, on the steering council at the same time when we decided to start the experiment for free threading?
I think Barry wasn't on it.
Yeah, I missed a couple of years there, but I'm not sure.
But, you know, I totally agree.
I think free threading is one of the most transformative
developments for Python, certainly since Python 3,
but even maybe more impactful because of the size
of the community today.
Personally, you know, not necessarily speaking
as a current or potentially former steering council member,
we'll see how that shakes out, but I think it's inevitable.
I think free threading is absolutely the future of Python, and I think it's going to unlock incredible potential and performance.
I think we just have to do it right.
And so I talked to lots of teams who are building various software all over the community.
And I actually think it's more of an educational and maybe an outreach problem than it is a technological problem.
I mean, yes, there are probably APIs that are missing that will make people's lives easier.
There's probably some libraries that will make other code a little easier to write or whatever or to understand.
But like all that's solvable.
And I think really reaching out to the teams that are, you know, like Thomas said, that are building the ecosystem, that are moving the ecosystem to a free threading world.
That's where we really need to spend our effort on.
And we'll get there.
It won't be that long.
It certainly won't be as long as it took us to get to Python 3.
I'm sort of curious, as someone who's not super experienced with threading or basic concurrency,
I mean, I've used it, but I feel like now we have threads, especially with free threading,
and subinterpreters, and multiprocessing, and async.io.
and I feel like for many people
now it's like oh my god
which one am I supposed to use
and for someone who's
experienced you can sort of say well
this seems like a better choice but
are there any plans to sort of try
to have a taxonomy
of what problems are solved
by which of these
I think
so the premise here
is that everyone would be using
one or more of these low-level techniques that you mentioned.
And I think that's not a good way of looking at it.
AsyncIO is a library that you want to use
for the things that AsyncIO is good at.
And you can actually very nicely combine it
with multiprocessing, with subprocesses,
so that subprocesses and subinterpreters,
just to make it clear that those are two very separate things,
and multi-threading, both with and without free threading.
And it solves different problems or it gives you different abilities
within the AsyncIO framework.
And the same is true for like GUI frameworks.
I mean, GUI frameworks usually want threads for multiple reasons,
but you can use these other things as well.
I don't think it's down to teaching end users when to use
or avoid all these different things.
I think we need higher level abstractions for tasks that people want to solve.
And then those can decide on what for their particular use case is a better approach.
For instance, PyTorch has multiple.
So it's used for people who don't know to train, not just train, but it's used in AI for generating large matrices and LLMs and what have you.
Part of it is loading data and processing it.
And the basic ideas of AsyncIO are,
oh, you can do all these things in parallel
because you're not waiting on the CPU,
you're just waiting on I.O.
Turns out it is still a good idea to use threads
for massively parallel I.O.
because otherwise you end up waiting longer than you need to.
So a problem where we thought AsyncIO would be the solution
and we never needed threads
is actually much improved if we tie in threads as well.
And we've seen massive, massive improvements in data loader.
There's even an article, a published article from some people at Meta
showing how much they improve the PyTorch data loader by using multiple threads.
But at a very low level, we don't want end users to need to make that choice, right?
Yeah.
I mean, I concurred.futures is a good point, right?
Like all of these approaches are all supported there and it's a unified one.
So if you were to teach this, for instance, you could say use concurrent
features.
These are all there.
This is the potential trade-off.
Like basically use threads.
It's going to be the fastest unless there's like some module you have
that's not, that's screwing up because of threads and use sub interpreters.
And if for some reason sub interpreters don't work, you should move to the
processing pool, the process pool.
But I mean, basically you just kind of just like, it's not, go sort the fast
stuff and for some reason it doesn't work use the next
fastest and just kind of do it that way
after that then you start to the lower
level like okay why
do I want to use sub interpreters instead of threads
and those kind of threads
but I think that's a different
I think we're all saying a different level
of abstraction which is a term we keep
bringing up today
and so I
think it's a level that a lot of people are not
going to have to care about I think the libraries are the ones that have
to care about this and who are going to do a lot
of this for you. I agree I would
Let me throw this out on our way out the door to get to Reuven's topic.
I would love to see it solidify around async and await,
and you just await a thing.
Maybe put a decorator on something.
Say, I want this to be threaded.
I want this to be IO.
And you just use async and await and don't have to think about it.
But that's my dream.
Reuven, what's your dream?
Well, how long do you have?
What's your topic?
So I want to talk about the Python ecosystem and funding.
And when I talk to people about Python and I talk to them about how it's open source, they're like, oh, right, it's open source.
That means I can download it for free.
And from their perspective, that's sort of where it starts and ends.
And the notion that people work on it, the notion that needs funding, the notion that there's a Python software foundation that supports a lot of these activities,
the infrastructure is completely unknown to them.
even quite shocking for them to hear. But Python is in many ways, I think, starting to become a
victim of its own success, that we've been dependent on companies for a number of years
to support developers and development. And we've been assuming that the PSF, which gives money out
to lots of organizations to run conferences and workshops and so forth, can sort of keep scaling
up and that they will have enough funding. And we've seen a few sort of shocks that system in
the last year. Most recently, the PSF announced that it was no longer going to be doing for versus
sort of pared down about a year ago, what it would give money for. And then about five months ago,
six months ago, I think it was in July or August, they said, actually, we're not gonna be able to
fund anything for about a year now. And then there was the government grant, I think from the NSF
that they turned down. And I'm not disputing the reasons for that at all. It basically, it said,
well, we'll give you the money if you don't worry about diversity and inclusion. And given that
that's like a core part of what the PSF is supposed to do, they could not do that without
shutting the doors, which would be kind of counterproductive. And so I feel like we're
not yet there, but we're sort of approaching this, talking about a term like a problem crisis in
funding Python, that the needs of the community keep growing and growing, whether it's workshops,
whether it's PyPI, whether it's conferences, and companies are getting squeezed. And the number of
people, it always shocks me every time there are PSF elections, the incredibly small number of people
who vote, which means that, let's assume half the people who are members, like for the millions and
millions of people who program Python out there, an infinitesimally small proportion of them actually
join and help to fund it. So I'm not quite sure what to do with this other than express concern.
But I feel like we've got to figure out ways to fund Python and the PSF
in new ways that will allow it to grow and scale as needed.
Yeah, I couldn't agree more. I mean, obviously, the PSF is close to my heart,
because i was on the board for i think a total of six or nine years or something uh over you know
the last 25. um i was also uh for six months i was the interim general manager because uh eva left
and we hadn't hired deb yet uh while i was on the board so i i i remember signing the sponsor
contracts for the companies that came in uh wanting to sponsor python and it is like it's
ridiculous how and i can say this working for a company that is one of the biggest sponsors of the
psf and has done so for years it's ridiculous how small those sponsorships are and yet how grateful
we were that they came in because every single one has such a big impact you can do so much good with
the money that comes in uh we need more corporate sponsorships more than we need like i mean obviously
a million people giving us a couple of bucks, giving the PSF, let's be clear, I'm not on the
board anymore. Giving the PSF a couple of bucks would be fantastic. But I think the big players
in the big corporate players, where all the AI money is, for instance, having done basically
no sponsorship of the PSF is mind boggling. It is a textbook fallacy or no, a tragedy of the
commons right there, right?
They rely entirely on PyPI and PyPI is run entirely with community resources, mostly
because of very, very generous and consistent, sponsorship, basically by Fastly.
but also the other sponsors of the PSF, and yet a lot, very large players use
those resources more than anyone else and don't actually contribute.
And I, yes.
Frustrating.
I mean, oh.
It's okay, Jodi, go ahead.
I was going to say, Georgie Kerr,
she wrote this fantastic blog post saying pretty much this
straight after Europython.
So Europython this year was really big, actually,
and she was wandering around looking at the sponsor booths,
and the usual players were there,
but none of these AI companies were there.
and the relationship actually between AI, if you want to call it that,
let's call it ML and neural networks,
and some of the really big companies, and Python actually is really complex.
Obviously, a lot of these companies, and some of us are here,
employ people to work on Python.
Companies like Meta and Google have contributed massively to frameworks
like PyTorch, TensorFlow, Keras.
So it's not as simple a picture as saying cough up money all the time.
Like there's a more complex picture here,
but definitely there are some notable absences.
And we talked about the volume of money going through.
I totally agree with the sentiment.
Like when the shortfall came and the grants program had to shut down,
we were brainstorming at JetBrains like maybe we can do some sort of,
I don't know, donate some more money and call other companies to do it, or we can call on people
in the community. And I was like, I don't want to call on people in the community to do it,
because they're probably the same people who are also donating their time for Python. Like,
it's just squeezing people who give so much of themselves to this community even more.
And it's not sustainable. Like Reuben said, if we keep doing this, the whole community is going to
collapse like i'm sure we've all had our own forms of burnout from giving too much
yeah i mean i want to say i'm going to pat ourselves on the back here everyone on this
call who works at a company are all sponsors of the psf thank goodness but there's obviously a lot
of people not on this call who are not sponsors and i know personally i wished every company that
generated revenue from python usage donated to the psf like and it doesn't see i and i think part
the problem is some people think it has to be like a hundred thousand dollars or something it does not
have to be a hundred thousand dollars now if you can afford that amount please do or more there are
many ways to donate more than the maximum amount for uh getting on the website um but it's one of
these funny things where a lot of people just like oh it's not me right like even startups don't some
do to give those ones credit but others don't because like oh we're we're burning through capital
blah blah blah i was like yeah but we're not we're asking for like less than you'd pay a dev
right by a lot per year right like the amount we actually asked for to get to the highest tier is
still less than a common developer in silicon valley if we're gonna price point to a geograph
geographical location we call kind of comprehend right i'm gonna steal annette bachelder's
observation here and yeah what what the psf would be happy with is less than a medium company spends
on the tips of expensed meals every year yeah and and yeah yeah and it's a long-running problem
right like i i mean i i've been on the psf for a long time too i've not served as many years as
uh it's almost on the board but i was like executive vice president because we had to
someone with that title uh at some point um but it's it's always been a struggle right like iree
and i also want to be clear i'm totally appreciative of where we have gotten too right because for the
longest time i was just dying for paid staff on the core team and now we have three developers
in presence thank goodness still not enough to be clear i want five and i've always said that but
i'll happily take three but it's one of these things where it's a constant struggle and it it
It got a little bit better before the pandemic just because everyone was spending on conferences.
And PyCon US is a big driver for the Python Software Foundation.
And I know your Python's a driver for the, your Python Society.
But then COVID hit and conferences haven't picked back up.
And then there's a whole new cohort of companies that have come in post-pandemic that have never had that experience of going to PyCon and sponsoring PyCon.
And so they don't think about, I think, sponsoring PyCon or the PSF because that's also a big kind of in your face.
You should help sponsor this.
And I think it's led to this kind of lull where offered spending has gone down.
New entrants into the community have not had that experience and thought about it.
And it's led to this kind of dearth where, yeah, that PSF had to stop giving out grant money.
And it sucks.
And I would love to see it not be that problem.
I want to add one interesting data point that I discovered in preparing for today.
NumFocus has about twice the budget of the PSF.
I was shocked to discover this.
So basically, it is possible to get money from companies
to sponsor development of Python-related projects.
And I don't know what they're doing that we aren't.
And I think it's worth talking and figuring it out.
We need a fundraiser and marketer in residence, maybe.
Who knows?
Lauren does a great job, to be clear.
Who does that?
The PSF has Lauren, and Lauren is that.
Okay.
Yes.
But it's still hard.
We have someone doing it full-time at the PSF,
and it's just hard to get.
It's, yeah.
It's to give cash up, cop up cash.
Yeah, and what do we get in return?
Well, we already get that, so.
Yeah, I know.
All right, Barry.
Yeah, I guess to just, you know,
shift gears into a different area,
something that I've been thinking a lot over this past year on the steering council. Thomas, I'm
sure, is going to be very well aware, having been instrumental in the lazy imports PEP A10.
We have to sort of rethink how we evolve Python and how we propose changes to Python and how we
discuss those changes in the community.
Because I think one of the things that I have heard over and over and over again is that
authoring PEPs is incredibly difficult and emotionally draining.
And it's a time sink.
And leading those discussions on discuss.python.org, which we typically call DPO,
is um is can be toxic at times and very difficult so one of the things that i i i realized as i was
thinking about this is that peps are 25 years old now right so um we've had this and not only just
peps are old but like we've gone through at least two if not more sort of complete revolutions in
and the way we discuss things, you know.
The community has grown incredibly.
The developer community is somewhat larger,
but just the number of people who are using Python
and who have an interest in it has grown exponentially.
So it has become really difficult to evolve the language
in the standard library and the interpreter.
And we need to sort of think about how we can make this easier for people and not lose the voice of the user.
And I mean, you know, the number of people who actually engage in topics on DPO is the tip of the iceberg.
You know, we've got millions and millions of users out there in the world who, for example, lazy imports will affect, free threading will affect and don't even know that they have a voice.
And maybe we have to basically represent that,
but we have to do it in a much more collaborative and positive way.
So that's something that I've been thinking about a lot.
And whether or not I'm on the steering council next year,
I think this is something that I'm going to spend some time on
trying to think about and talk to people about ways we can make this easier for everyone.
The diversity of use cases for Python in the last couple of years.
So complex.
Yes, exactly.
It should also be prefaced that Barry created the  PEP process.
He should have started that one.
It is that old.
Yeah.
By the way, just so everyone knows,
these are not ages jokes to be mean to Barry.
No, no.
All of us have known Barry long enough
that we know Barry's okay with us making these jokes.
To be very, very...
Also, I am almost as old as Barry,
although I don't look as old as Barry.
Yeah, we're all over the same age anyway.
Yeah, Barry and I have known each other for 25 years, and I've always made these jokes of him.
So it is different when you know each other in person, let's put it that way.
I think for the  PEP process, I think for a lot of people, it's not obvious how difficult the process is.
I mean, it wasn't even obvious to me.
I saw people avoiding writing peps multiple times and I was upset, like on the steering
council, right?
I saw people making changes where I thought this is definitely something that should have
been discussed in a  PEP and the discussion should be recorded in a  PEP and all that.
And I didn't understand why they didn't until basically until  PEP 810.
So I did  PEP 779, which was the, giving free threading,  supported status at
the start of the year. And the discussion there was, you know, sort of as expected and it's already,
was already an accepted peb. It was just the question of how does it become supported?
That one wasn't too exhausting. And then we got to Lazy Imports, which was Pablo, who is
another steering council member, as well as a bunch of other contributors, including me and two of my
co-workers and one of my former co-workers, who had all had a lot of experience with Lazy Imports,
but not necessarily as much experience with the  PEP process.
And Pablo took the front seat because he knew the  PEP process and he's done
like five peps in the last year or something, some ridiculous number.
And he shared with us the vitriol he got for like offline for the, just the
audacity of proposing something that people disagreed with or something.
And that was like, this is a technical, technical, suggestion.
This is not a code of conduct issue where I have received my fair share of vitriol around.
This is a technical discussion, and yet he gets these ridiculous accusations in his mailbox.
And for some reason, only the primary author gets it as well, which is just weird to me.
I'll point out something.
People are lazy, Thomas, is what I think you just said.
Remember, the steering council exists because Guido got the brunt of this for Pet 572, which was the walrus operator, right?
Which is just like this minor little syntactic thing that is kind of cool when you need it.
But like just the amount of anger and negative energy and vitriol that he got over that was enough for him to just say, I'm out, you know, and you guys figure it out.
And, and that's, that, that cannot be an acceptable way to, discuss the evolution of the language.
Especially since apparently now every single  PEP author of, of any contentious or semi-contentious pep.
Although I have to say  PEP 810 had such broad support.
It was hard to call it contentious.
It's just, there's a couple of very loud opinions, I guess.
And, and I'm not saying we shouldn't listen to people.
We should definitely listen to, to especially contrary opinions, but there has to be a limit.
There has to be an acceptable way of bringing things up.
There has to be an acceptable way of saying, Hey, you didn't actually read the pep.
Please go back and reconsider everything you said after you fully digested the things,
because everything's already been addressed in the pep.
It's just really hard to do this in a way that doesn't destroy the relationship with the person you're telling this, right?
It's hard to tell people, hey, I'm not going to listen to you because you've done a bad job.
You've chosen not to inform yourself.
And I think you make another really strong point, Thomas, which is that there have been changes that have been made to Python that really should have been a pep.
and they aren't because people don't want to go through,
core developers don't want to go through this gauntlet
and so they'll create a PR and then that,
but that's also not good because then, you know,
we don't have the right level of consideration
and you think about the way that, you know,
if you're in your job and you're making a change
to something in your job,
you have a very close relationship to your teammates
and so you have that kind of respect
and hopefully, right?
Like compassion and consideration.
And you can have a very productive discussion
about a thing and you may win some arguments
and you may lose some arguments,
but the team moves forward as one.
And I think we've lost a bit of that in Python.
So yeah, that's not great.
I think society in general
could use a little more civility and kindness,
especially to strangers that they haven't met
in forums, social media, driving, you name it.
Okay, but we're not going to solve that here, I'm sure.
So instead, let's do Gregory's topic.
Hey, I'm going to change topics quite a bit,
but I wanted to call 2025 the year of type checking
and language server protocols.
So many of us probably have used tools like mypy
to check to see if the types line up in our code
or whether or not we happen to be overriding functions correctly.
And so I've used mypy for many years and loved the tool and had a great opportunity to chat with the creator of it.
And I integrate that into my CI, and it's really been wonderful.
And I've also been using a lot of LSPs, like, for example, PyRite or PyLands.
But in this year, one of the things that we've seen is, number one, Pyrefly from the team at Meta.
We've also seen ty from the team at Astral.
And there's another one called Zubon, and Zubon is from David Halter.
David was also the person who created JEDI, which is another system in Python that helped with a lot of LSP tasks.
What's interesting about all three of the tools that I just mentioned is that they're implemented in Rust,
and they have taken a lot of the opportunity to make the type checker and or the LSP significantly faster.
So for me, this has changed how I use the LSP or the type checker and how frequently I use it.
And in my experience, it has helped me to take things that might take tens of seconds or hundreds of seconds and cut them down often to less than a second.
And it's really changed the way in which I'm using a lot of the tools like ty or Pyrefly or Zubon.
So I can have some more details if I'm allowed to share, Michael, but I would say 2025 is the year of type checkers and LSPs.
I think given the timing, let's have people give some feedback.
I personally have been using Pyrefly a ton and am a big fan of it.
Yeah.
Yeah, I mean.
I don't know if I'm allowed to have an opinion that isn't Pyrefly is awesome.
I mean, I'm not on the Pyrefly team, but I do regularly chat with people from the Pyrefly team.
Tell people real quick what it is, Thomas.
So Pyrefly is meta's attempt at a Rust-based type checker.
And so it's very similar to ty.
It started basically at the same time, a little later.
Meta originally had a type checker called Pyre,
which was written in OCaml.
They basically decided to start a rewrite in Rust,
and then that really took off,
and that's where we're going now.
Yeah, I don't know what I can say,
because I'm actually on the same team as the Pylands team.
So, but no, I mean, I think it's good.
I think this is one of those interesting scenarios
where some people realize like, you know what?
We're going to pay the penalty of writing a tool
in a way that's faster, but makes us go slower
because the overall win for the community
is going to be a good win.
So it's worth that headache, right?
Not to say I don't want to scare people off
from writing Rust, but let's be honest.
It takes more work to write Rust code
than it does take to write Python code.
But some people chose to make that trade off
and we're all benefiting from it.
The one thing I will say that's kind of interesting from this
that hasn't gotten a lot of play yet
because it's still being developed,
but PyLens is actually working with the Pyrefly team
to define a type server protocol, TSP,
so that a lot of these type servers
can just kind of feed the type information
to a higher level LSP
and let that LSP handle the stuff like symbol renaming
and all that stuff, right?
Because the key thing here
and the reason there's so many
different type checkers is there are there is a spec right and everyone's trying to implement it but
there's differences like in type in terms of type inferencing and um if you actually go listen to
michael's interview from talk python to me with the powerfly team they actually did a nice little
explanation of like the difference between pyrites approach and powerfly's approach and so there's a
bit of variance but for instance i think there's some talk now of trying to like how do we make it
so everyone doesn't have to reimplement how to rename a symbol right that's kind of boring that's
where the interesting work is.
And that's not performant from a perspective of
you want instantaneously to get that squiggly red line
in whether it's VS Code or it's in PyCharm
or whatever your editor is, right?
You want to get it as fast as possible.
But the rename...
Jupyter.
What?
No, not Emacs.
What's that?
But, you know, just to...
Oh, sorry.
Just to bring things full circle,
It's that focus on user experience, right?
Which is, yes, you want that squiggly line,
but when things go wrong,
when your type checker says,
oh, you've got a problem,
how, you know, like I think about as an analogy,
how Pablo has done an amazing amount of work
on the error reporting, right?
When you get an exception and, you know,
now you have a lot more clues about
what is it that I actually have to change
to make the tool, you know, to fix the problem, right?
Like so many times years ago, you know,
when people were using mypy, for example,
and they'd have some complex failure of their type annotations
and have absolutely no idea what to do about it.
And so getting to a place where now we're not just telling people
you've done it wrong, but also here's some ideas about how to fix it.
That's the reason.
Rather than, I guess we're going to have a squiggly.
How are you telling AI?
I think this is a full circle here,
because honestly, using typing in your Python code
gives a lot of context to the AI when you ask for help
if you just give it a fragment.
That's true.
And also, if you can teach your AI agent
to use the type checkers and use the LSPs,
it will also generate better code for you.
I think the one challenge I would add
to what Barry said a moment ago
is that if you're a developer and you're using, say,
three or four type checkers at the same time,
you also have to be careful about the fact
that some of them won't flag an error
that the other one will flag.
So I've recently written Python programs
and even built a tool with one of my students named Benedict
that will automatically generate Python programs
that will cause type checkers to disagree with each other.
There are cases that,
mypy will flag it as an error,
but none of the other tools will take an error.
And there are also cases where the new tools will all agree with each other,
but disagree with mypy.
So there is a type checker conformance test suite.
But I think as developers,
even though it might be the year of LSP and type checker,
we also have to be aware of the fact that these tools are maturing
and there's still disagreement among them.
And also just different philosophies when it comes to how to type check
and how to infer.
And so we have to think about all of those things
as these tools mature and become part of our ecosystem.
Yeah, Greg, that last point is important.
Sorry, go ahead.
Out of curiosity, how did the things
where the type checkers disagree
match up with the actual runtime behavior of Python?
Was it like false positives or false negatives?
Ah, that's a really good question.
I'll give you more details in the show notes
because we actually have it in a GitHub repository
and I can share it with people.
But I think some of it might simply be
related to cases where mypy is more conformant to the spec,
but the other new tools are not as conformant.
So you can import overload from typing
and then have a very overloaded function.
And mypy will actually flag the fact
that it's an overloaded function with multiple signatures,
whereas PyRite and Pyrefly and Zubon
will not actually flag that even though they should.
Yeah. Another big area is optional versus not optional. Like, are you allowed to pass a thing
that is an optional string when the thing accepts a string? Some stuff's like, yeah,
it's probably fine. Others are like, no, no, no. This is an error that you have to do a check. And
if you want to switch type checkers, you might end up with a thousand warnings that you didn't
previously had because of an intentional difference of opinion on how strict to be, I think.
Yeah. So you have to think about false positives and false negatives when you're willing to break
the build because of a type error. All of those things are things you have to factor in. But to go
quickly to this connection to AI, I know it's only recently, but the Pyrefly team actually announced
that they're making Pyrefly work directly with Pydantic AI. So there's going to be an interoperability
between those tools so that when you're building an AI agent using Pydantic AI, you can also then
have better guarantees when you're using Pyrefly as your type checker. It makes total sense though,
because then the reasoning LLM that's at the core of the agent
can actually have that information before it tries to execute the code.
And you don't get in that loop that they often get in.
It can correct it before it runs.
Yeah, really good point.
I want to just sort of express my appreciation
to all the people working on this typing stuff.
As someone who's come from many, many years in dynamic languages,
and I was always like, oh, typing.
Those silly people, those statically type languages.
And I see, A, I appreciate the value.
B, I love seeing how easy it is for people to ease into it when they're in Python.
It's not all or nothing.
C, I love the huge number of tools.
The competition in this space is really exciting.
And D, guess what?
It really, really does help.
And I'll even add an E, which is my students who come from Java, C++, C#, and so forth, feel relief.
They find that without type checking, it's like doing a trapeze act without a safety net.
And so they're very happy to have that typing in there, typings in there.
So kudos to everyone.
Yeah.
All right, folks.
We are out of time.
This could literally go for hours longer.
It was a big year.
I think we need to just have a final word.
I'll start and we'll just go around.
So my final thought here is we've talked about some things that are negatives
or sort of downers or whatever here and there,
but I still think it's an incredibly exciting time to be a developer,
data scientist.
There's so much opportunity out there.
There's so many things to learn and take advantage of and stay on top of.
Amazing.
Every day is slightly more amazing than the previous day.
So I love it.
Gregory, let's go to you next.
Let's go around the circle.
Yeah, I wanted to give a shout out to all of the local Python conferences.
I actually, on a regular basis, have attended the PyOhio conference.
And it is incredible.
The organizers do an absolutely amazing job.
And they have it hosted on a campus, oftentimes at Ohio State or Cleveland State University.
And incredibly, PyOhio is a free conference that anyone can attend with no registration fee.
So Michael, on a comment that I think is really positive, wow, I'm so excited about the regional Python conferences that I've been able to attend.
Thomas.
Wow, I didn't expect this.
So, I think, I think I want to give a shout out to new people joining the community and also joining just core developer team as triage or it's just drive by commenters.
I know we harped a little bit about people, you know, giving strong opinions and discussions, but we, we, I always look to the far future as well as the near future.
And we always need new people.
We need new ideas.
We need new opinions.
So yeah, I'm excited that there's still people joining and signing up.
And even when it's thankless work, so I guess I want to say thank you to people doing all the thankless work.
Jodi.
Yeah, I want to say this is actually really only my third year or so really in the Python community.
So before that, I was just sort of on the fringes, right?
And after I started advocacy, I started going to the conferences and meeting people.
And I think I didn't kind of get how special the community was until I watched the Python documentary this year.
And I talked to Paul about this, Paul Everett afterwards, also made fun of him for his like early 2000s fashion.
But I think I'm a relative newcomer to this community and you've all made me feel so welcome.
And I guess I want to thank all the incumbents for everything you've done to make this such a special tech community for minorities and everyone, newbies.
Python is love.
Oh, geez.
How am I supposed to follow that?
A little tear.
Yeah, I think one of the interesting things that we're kind of looping on here is I think the language evolution has slowed down, but it's obviously not stopped, right?
Like as Thomas pointed out, there's a lot more stuff happening behind the scenes.
Lazy imports are coming, and that was a syntactic change, which apparently brings out the mean side of some people.
And we've obviously got our challenges and stuff, but things are still going.
We're still chugging along.
We're still trying to be an open, welcoming place for people like Jody and everyone else who's new coming on over and continue to be a fun place for all of us slightly graying beard people who have been here for a long time to make us want to stick around.
So, yeah, I think it's just more of the same, honestly.
It's all of us just continue to do what we can to help out to keep this community being a great place.
and it all just keeps going forward.
And I'll just end with,
if you work for a company
that's not sponsoring the PSF,
please do so.
So it's rare to have,
I mean, a programming language
or any sort of tool
where it is both really,
really beneficial to your career
and you get to hang out
with really special,
nice, interesting people. And it's easy to take all that for granted if you've been steeped in
the community. I went to a conference about six months ago, a non-Python conference,
and that was shocking to me to discover that all the speakers were from advertisers and sponsors.
Everything was super commercialized. People were not interested in just like hanging out and sharing
with each other. And it was a shock to me because I've been to basically only Python conferences
for so many years, I was like, oh, that's not the norm in the industry. So we've got something
really special going that not only is good for the people, but good for everyone's careers and
mutually reinforcing and helping each other. And that's really fantastic. And we should appreciate
that. Absolutely. Barry, final word. Well, Thomas stole my thunder just a little bit, but just to tie
a couple of these ideas together.
Python, and Brett said this, right?
Python is the community,
or the community is Python.
There's no company that is telling anybody
what Python should be.
Python is what we make it.
And as folks like myself get a little older
and we have younger people coming into the community,
both developers and everything else,
who are shaping Python into their vision.
I encourage you, if you've thought about becoming a core dev,
find a mentor.
There are people out there that will help you.
If you want to be involved in the community, the PSF, reach out.
There are people who will help guide you into this community.
You can be involved.
Do not let any self-imposed limitations stop you from becoming part of the Python community in the way that you want to.
And eventually run for the steering council because we need many, many, many more candidates next year.
And you don't need any qualifications either because I'm a high school dropout and I never went to college or anything.
And look at me.
Amazing.
And I have a PhD, and I will tell you,
I did not need all that to become a Python developer
because of the Python I've heard about before I got the PhD.
So--
Well, I'm a bass player, so if I can do it, anybody can do it.
Thank you, everyone, for being here.
This awesome look back in the air,
and I really appreciate you all taking the time.
Thank you, Michael.
Thanks.
This was great fun.
Thanks, everybody.
Bye, everybody.
Good to see everybody.
I thought it was.